= SAQ 5: Software updates =

Source: "Navigating DSS v2.0" from https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org 

<b>
Guidance for Requirements 5 and 6: Maintain a Vulnerability Management Program

Requirement 5: Use and regularly update anti-virus software or programs
</b>

<i>
Malicious software, commonly referred to as “malware”—including viruses, worms, and Trojans—enters the network during many business-
approved activities including employee e-mail and use of the Internet, mobile computers, and storage devices, resulting in the exploitation of
system vulnerabilities. Anti-virus software must be used on all systems commonly affected by malware to protect systems from current and
evolving malicious software threats.
</i>

== 5.1 Deploy anti-virus software ==

Deploy anti-virus software on all systems commonly
affected by malicious software (particularly personal computers
and servers).

<i>
There is a constant stream of attacks using widely published exploits, often "0 day"
(published and spread throughout networks within an hour of discovery) against
otherwise secured systems. Without anti-virus software that is updated regularly,
these new forms of malicious software can attack and disable your network.

Malicious software may be unknowingly downloaded and/or installed from the
internet, but computers are also vulnerable when using removable storage devices
such as CDs and DVDs, USB memory sticks and hard drives, digital cameras,
personal digital assistants (PDAs) and other peripheral devices. Without anti-virus
software installed, these computers may become access points into your network,
and/or maliciously target information within the network.

While systems that are commonly affected by malicious software typically do not
include mainframes and most Unix systems (see more detail below), each entity
must have a process according to PCI DSS Requirement 6.2 to identify and address
new security vulnerabilities and update their configuration standards and processes
accordingly. If another type of solution addresses the identical threats with a different
methodology than a signature-based approach, it may still be acceptable to meet the
requirement.

Trends in malicious software related to operating systems an entity uses should be
included in the identification of new security vulnerabilities, and methods to address
new trends should be incorporated into the company's configuration standards and
protection mechanisms as needed.

Typically, the following operating systems are not commonly affected by malicious
software: mainframes, and certain Unix servers (such as AIX, Solaris, and HP-Unix).
However, industry trends for malicious software can change quickly and each
organization must comply with Requirement 6.2 to identify and address new security
vulnerabilities and update their configuration standards and processes accordingly.
</i>

==== 5.1.1 Anti-virus ====

Ensure that all anti-virus programs are capable of
detecting, removing, and protecting against all known types of
malicious software.

<i>It is important to protect against ALL types and forms of malicious software.
</i>

== 5.2 Anti-virus == 

Ensure that all anti-virus mechanisms are current, actively running, and generating audit logs.

<i>
The best anti-virus software is limited in effectiveness if it does not have current anti-
virus signatures or if it isn't active in the network or on an individual's computer.

Audit logs provide the ability to monitor virus activity and anti-virus reactions. Thus, it
is imperative that anti-virus software be configured to generate audit logs and that
these logs be managed in accordance with Requirement 10.
</i>

